weather warnings, a chance of
ﬂooding and
flooding and disruption, look at
ﬂooding and disruption, look at
those
flooding and disruption, look at
those online and find out what they
mean where you are. More rain
especially in Wales tomorrow. She
was full Scotland and Northern
Ireland on a mild start but these
will clear to allow some sunshine to
come through and for the afternoon
brightening up in northern England
too. The rain easing in Wales. Still
too. The rain easing in Walas. Still
in towards
too. The rain easing in Wales. Still
in towards the south—east for the
afternoon. For
afternoon. Forthe
in towards the south—east for the
afternoon. For the Midlands, East
Anglia and
afternoon. Forthe Midlands, East
Anglia and southern England, a
cloudy day, occasional rain and the
days highest
day’s highest temperatures. It’s not
days highest temperatures. It’s not
as windy
day’s highest temperatures. It’s not
as windy yesterday but overnight and
into Saturday wind strength and is
again pushing another area of rain
northwards in what will be initially
asked chilly start the night.
Saturday is looking quite stormy. A
deep area of pressure low buy. The
winds picking up across all areas
and more rain spreading east and
some of the rain on Saturday not
just heavy but torrential as it
moves on through with really squally
winds. Brightening up behind the
rain sunshine and showers. Gusts of
60 mils
60 miles an hour. Even elsewhere as
the rain moves through, 50—60 miles
the rain moves through, 50-60 milas
an hour gusts are
the rain moves through, 50—60 miles
an hour gusts are possible and windy
an hour gusts are possibla and windy
again on
an hour gusts are possible and windy
again on Sunday and Monday, a bit
more rain to come
Strictly stars of 2020 have
hit the dance ﬂoor.
And no-one wants to be the first
to go home.
This is going to be one fierce
competition.
Sometimes life happens,
it arrives,
and you just have to deal with it.
We’re going to be OK, aren’t we?
I’m illicit now.
I just want the truth.
The Six Nations is back, and it’s
going down to the final game.
The Six Nations bursts into life!
Super Saturday starts
with Wales vs Scotland,
and then the decider —
France vs Ireland.
# I got no time
# To play
# Your silly games... #
We mustn’t be victims,
but protagonists of our stories.
# ..Silly games... #
As individuals,
we have an impossible battle.
As a collective, we stand a chance.
# ..games... #.
I like it. Woo!
Welcome to Question Time. Tonight,
on tonight’s programme Chris Philp,
eluted
elected in 2015 after a career in
eluted in 2015 after a career in
business,
elected in 2015 after a career in
business, currently responsible for
immigration and compliance. Labour’s
immigration and compliance. Laboqu
Shadow
immigration and compliance. Labour’s
Shadow Home Secretary Nick Thomas
Simmons. Marie van der Zyl,
employment lawyer and president of
the Board of Deputies of British
jews.
Jews. Joining us from New York,
jaws. joining us from New York,
American
Jews. Joining us from New York,
American financier,
Americanfinancier, Republican
Jews. Joining us from New York,
American financier, Republican and
very brieﬂy
very briefly White House head of
communications under Donald Trump,
communications under Donald Tmmp,
Anthony
communications under Donald Trump,
Anthony Scaramucci. And Chicago born
Anthony Saramucci. And Chicago born
and bred, now
Anthony Scaramucci. And Chicago born
and bred, now living in the UK,
playwright, broadcaster and critic,
Bonnie Greer. Good evening, welcome
to my guests in the studio and Nick
and Anthony who are joining us down
the line. Welcome to our audience
tonight, you are from Lincoln. Very
good to see you joining us
virtually. Thank you for
virtually. Thank you forjoining us.
virtually. Thank you for joining us.
join in the
virtually. Thank you forjoining us.
Join in the conversation in the
join in the conversation in the
usual way,
Join in the conversation in the
usual way, you know how, on social
media. Let’s get started with our
first question tonight which is from
David Lane.
David Lane. Good evening, Pannell.
Good evening, Pannell.
In view of the report released
today by the Equalities
and Human Rights Commission,
which identified serious failings
by the Labour Party in dealing
with anti—semitic racism,
should just one individual be
held to account?
Chris? It is a damning report, it
finds the Labour Party acted
unlawfully. It finds that
unlawfully. It finds thatJeremy
unlawfully. It finds that jeremy
Corbyn’s
unlawfully. It finds thatJeremy
Corbyn’s office effectively covered
“P
up 23
Corbyn’s office effectively covered
up 23 different allegations of
anti—Semitism. But I think it goes
anti-Semitism. But I think it goes
beyond
anti—Semitism. But I think it goes
beyond Jeremy Corbyn. I think Keir
beyond jeremy Corbyn. I think Keir
Starmer
beyond Jeremy Corbyn. I think Keir
Starmer has questions to answer
himself. Because for five years Keir
Starmer sat on the Labour front
Starmer sat on the labour front
bench
Starmer sat on the Labour front
bench and said nothing while this
bench and said nothing whila this
was going on.
bench and said nothing while this
was going on. I didn’t hear him
condemning this activity are holding
jeremy
Jeremy Corbyn to account, unlike
jeremy Corbyn to account, unlike
many other
Jeremy Corbyn to account, unlike
many other Labour MPs and many
many other labour MPs and many
labour
many other Labour MPs and many
Labour frontbenchers,
Labourfrontbenchers, he did not
labour frontbenchers, he did not
resign. He said
Labourfrontbenchers, he did not
resign. He said nothing and he
defended Jeremy Corbyn and he
defended jeremy Corbyn and he
promoted
defended Jeremy Corbyn and he
promoted Jeremy Corbyn as a
promoted jeremy Corbyn as a
potential
promoted Jeremy Corbyn as a
potential prime minister less than a
year ago. I think Keir Starmer needs
to do two things if he is serious
about fixing this. Firstly, he
should apologise personally for his
failure to speak out on this issue
when he was on the front bench. It
was convenient for him to sit there
and stay quiet in the hope that he
would take over as leader rather
cynically. Secondly, it is not
cynically. Secondly, it is notjust
cynically. Secondly, it is not just
to suspend
cynically. Secondly, it is notjust
to suspend Jeremy Corbyn, he should
to suspend jeremy Corbyn, he should
kick jeremy
to suspend Jeremy Corbyn, he should
kickJeremy Corbyn out of the Labour
kick jeremy Corbyn out of the labour
Party because
kickJeremy Corbyn out of the Labour
Party because this report is so
damning. Jeremy Corbyn’s response to
damning. jeremy Corbyn’s response to
it, saying it had
damning. Jeremy Corbyn’s response to
it, saying it had been hugely
exaggerated for political purposes,
was disgraceful. Keir Starmer needs
to do both of those things if he is
serious. The report found political
interference in anti—Semitism
interference in anti-Semitism
complaints.
interference in anti—Semitism
complaints. It did not use the word
cover. Nick, this is not a
comfortable day for you. You were
also part of the front bench during
all of this. What do you have to
all of this. what do you have to
say? Firstly,
all of this. What do you have to
say? Firstly, this is a shameful day
for the Labour Party. We accept the
for the labour Party. We accept the
findings of the
for the Labour Party. We accept the
findings of the equality and human
rights report in the entirety and we
will act on the recommendations. But
first and foremost I want to
acknowledge the hurt that has been
caused to the
caused to theJewish community over
caused to the jewish community over
the past five
caused to theJewish community over
the past five years. Keir Starmer
has expressed our profound sorrow
for this. We are profoundly sorry
for that hurt that has been caused.
Todars report
Today’s report is an appalling,
Todars report is an appalling,
damning
Today’s report is an appalling,
damning report that is before us,
but we now have to act upon the
recommendations of that report. I
never thought I would be sitting on
your show after the last Labour
your show after the last labour
government
your show after the last Labour
government created the Equality and
Human Rights Commission and actually
be speaking about an investigation
of findings into the Labour Party
offindings into the labour Party
itself, but
of findings into the Labour Party
itself, but that is where we are. We
will now work to ensure that, yes,
our complaints processes are
improved, that they are independent,
they are where they should be, but
we will do more than that. The
answer to this is not
answer to this is notjust about
answer to this is not just about
process,
answer to this is notjust about
process, important though that is,
it is about changing the culture of
our party so it is a place where
everybody feels welcome and
everybody feel safe. What Keir
Starmer has done today with a
decisive speech of moral clarity is
to show the way towards that. I know
there is a long way to go. But his
speech and our commitment to taking
action on this is the start of that
road. Talking of moral clarity, one
of the things that upset many in the
jewish
Jewish community is a Labour’s
jewish community is a Labour’s
refusal
Jewish community is a Labour’s
refusal to accept in full the
International Holocaust remembrance
alliance was back definition of
anti—Semitism in 2018. You endorsed
anti-Semitism in 2018. You endorsed
that
anti—Semitism in 2018. You endorsed
that decision not to accept it. He
went out on the airwaves defending
the decision not to accept it.
labour
Labour changed its position
the decision not to accept it.
Labour changed its positionjust two
labour changed its position just two
months
Labour changed its positionjust two
months later. I don’t think that is
a fair characterisation of what I
said that day. What I said that day
said that day. what I said that day
was the
said that day. What I said that day
was the abuse that was being
referred to, the appalling
anti—Semitic abuse, whatever was in
anti-Semitic abuse, whatever was in
the mle book,
anti—Semitic abuse, whatever was in
the rule book, was absolutely wrong
the NI; book, was absolutely wrong
and had
the rule book, was absolutely wrong
and had to be dealt with. I also
said the NEC was right to look again
at the decision they made not to
adopt all of the examples that went
with the definition. But you did not
accept all those examples, Nick. You
went out on the Today programme and
on the airwaves explaining that
labour
Labour should not accept all those
labour should not accept all those
examples as
Labour should not accept all those
examples as part of that definition.
No, that is an unfair
characterisation of what I said in
the interview, with respect, Fiona.
What I said was the NEC were right
what I said was the NEC were right
to look
What I said was the NEC were right
to look at it again because of the
decision they made. They had to look
at it again and they made the right
decision. Look, I
decision. Look, Iwill
at it again and they made the right
decision. Look, Iwillspeak
decision. Look, I will speak about
the fact that I raised the issue of
anti—Semitism with members of the
anti-Semitism with members of the
Shadow
anti—Semitism with members of the
Shadow Cabinet, I was not in the
Shadow Cabinet. I also said when I
was out on the media that more
action had to be taken on
anti—Semitism. Keir Starmer spoke
anti-Semitism. Keir Starmer spoke
with a
anti—Semitism. Keir Starmer spoke
with a cabinet about it and to the
media. But the reality is we all
have to accept today the failure of
collective leadership, that is what
collactive leadership, that is what
that
collective leadership, that is what
that report makes absolutely clear.
that report makes absolutely dear.
I am not
that report makes absolutely clear.
I am not shying away from it, I
accept totally that report. Today we
are under this new leadership with
Keir Starmer, we have made tackling
anti—Semitism at the very top
anti-Semitism at the very top
priority. But I
anti—Semitism at the very top
priority. But I have always asked to
be judged on
bejudged on actions, not
priority. But I have always asked to
be judged on actions, not words.
bejudged on actions, not words. I
be judged on actions, not words. I
see today as
bejudged on actions, not words. I
see today as the start of that and
Keir Starmer is showing this morning
through that speech what we are now
going to do and what we will now do
to try to ensure that the scourge of
anti—Semitism is driven out of our
anti-Semitism is driven out of our
party and it is a
anti—Semitism is driven out of our
party and it is a safe and welcoming
place, which is the Labour Party I
place, which is the labour Party I
want to
place, which is the Labour Party I
want to see. Keir Starmer had five
years to take action and in those
five years in the Shadow Cabinet
supporting Jeremy Corbyn he did
supporting jeremy Corbyn he did
nothing, he
supporting Jeremy Corbyn he did
nothing, he should apologise for
that. Can I
that. Can Ijust say I want to talk
that. (“an I just say I want to talk
about
that. Can Ijust say I want to talk
about trauma because sometimes
politicians talk about issues and
they talk about things that call
they talk about things that all
cold
they talk about things that call
cold and they do not talk about
things that are hot and one of those
trauma. I am a former deputy chair
of the British Museum and I was
invited a year—and—a—half ago by the
invited a year-and-a-half ago by the
director to
invited a year—and—a—half ago by the
director to create a project around
around reclamation. We decided to
look at African enslavement and the
enslavement of people of African
ancestry. And to look at trauma, the
trauma that people can hold inside
trauma that peopla ran hold inside
of
trauma that people can hold inside
of themselves, even if you did not
experience it yourself. It is handed
down by generation to generation to
generation to generation, and it is
real. And for me if a black person
tells me they are not safe, they
don’t feel safe in an environment,
they feel it is racist and it is
racist, I listen. We have to listen
because of that trauma of
enslavement. I am going to say the
same thing about the
same thing about theJewish people.
same thing about the jewish peopla.
If jewish
same thing about theJewish people.
IfJewish people tell you someplace
If jewish peopla tell you someplace
is
IfJewish people tell you someplace
is unsafe for them, they don’t feel
good, it feels bad, they are holding
trauma and we have to understand
that. We have to begin to talk about
that. People may think it is trivial
or it didn’t exist or it doesn’t
mean anything, but the Holocaust was
the greatest crime of the 20th
century and we need to teach it in
the schools and we need to
understand it at every level that
exists, just as we need to
understand the transatlantic slave
trade and its impact on people of
trade and its impact on peopla of
African
trade and its impact on people of
African descent today. We need to
understand the Holocaust and what it
means to
means toJewish people and to those
means to jewish peopla and to those
of us who
means toJewish people and to those
of us who are not
of us who are notJewish. And for
of us who are not jewish. And for
the labour
of us who are notJewish. And for
the Labour Party I cannot even
the labour Party I cannot even
express how
express howl
the Labour Party I cannot even
express how I feel, at the Labour
express how I feel, at the labour
Party is taught
express how I feel, at the Labour
Party is caught up in this. I am a
labour voter and I will always vote
labour, I
Labour, I became a citizen so I
labour, I became a citizen so I
could vote
Labour, I became a citizen so I
could vote Labour and I will always
could vote labour and I will always
vote for
could vote Labour and I will always
vote for the Labour Party because I
vote for the labour Party because I
think it is
vote for the Labour Party because I
think it is the best coalition of
the left for this country. But for
this party to be caught up in
something like this makes me sick
and I don’t want to hear it, I don’t
want to hear all the other stuff. It
needs to be dealt with immediately
at the top with immediate due
diligence. Whether
diligence. WhetherJeremy is an
anti—Semite or what, how would I
anti-Semite or what, how would I
know
anti—Semite or what, how would I
know that? He doesn’t seem like one
to me, but how would I know? The
peopla who
people who know other people who
peopla who know other peopla who
feel it
people who know other people who
feel it and that is who we should be
listening to. Marie. It has been an
incredibly painful day, it is a
damning incitement of labour. This
is really serious. The report has
found that the Labour Party has
committed unlawful acts of
harassment and victimisation against
jewish
Jewish people. It does not get any
jewish peopla. It does not get any
worse
Jewish people. It does not get any
worse than that, does it? And we
felt during this time people were
making allegations that raising
this, as Bonnie said, were smears,
some kind of deliberate action. And
the jewish
theJewish community did not want
the jewish community did not want
this fight, but
theJewish community did not want
this fight, but we had to stand up,
we had to say this was wrong and we
were proud to do that. And today is
a damning indictment, as I have
said. What has happened during the
said. what has happened during the
course of
said. What has happened during the
course of the last few years is that
anti—Semitism was on the fringes of
anti-Semitism was on the fringes of
society and it
anti—Semitism was on the fringes of
society and it has been brought
straight into mainstream politics
straight into mainstream politic
into
straight into mainstream politics
into the political party. Jeremy
into the political party. jeremy
Corbyn and
into the political party. Jeremy
Corbyn and his leadership made a
political decision to ignore, not to
tackla,
tackle, anti—Semitism. That is so
tackla, anti-Semitism. That is so
appalling, it is
tackle, anti—Semitism. That is so
appalling, it is not imaginable in
appalling, it is not imaginabla in
this day and
appalling, it is not imaginable in
this day and age. The leadership did
nothing about it and here we are
today talking all these years later
when this could have been resolved.
And not only did the leadership of
the party not do anything about it,
we have now got findings of
interference, political interference
by the leader’s office. It does not
get much worse than that, does it?
(“an I ask you,
Can I ask you, Jeremy Corbyn has
(“an I ask you, jeremy Corbyn has
said again
Can I ask you, Jeremy Corbyn has
said again today that he was not
anti—Semitic and anybody who says
anti-Semitic and anybody who says
there
anti—Semitic and anybody who says
there was not a problem with
anti—Semitism in labour it was
anti-Semitism in labour it was
wrong. But
anti—Semitism in labour it was
wrong. But the question is should
just one individual be held to
account? It is a question of the
culture in the party. The problem
with anti—Semitism runs deep. This
with anti-Semitism runs deep. This
is going to be
with anti—Semitism runs deep. This
is going to be the beginning of a
very long journey.
very longjourney. It
is going to be the beginning of a
very long journey. It is all very
well the Labour Party saying sorry
well the labour Party saying sorry
and Keir
well the Labour Party saying sorry
and Keir Starmer did give an apology
on the day he was elected, but what
is important here is that we see
action. Words are only so much, we
need to see that the action plan is
implemented by the 10th of December
and there need to be key changes
across the party. We need an
independent disciplinary process,
education, and to tackle that
education, and to tackla that
culture.
education, and to tackle that
culture. And this is going to be
something that is not going to
change overnight. There is a lot of
pain and a lot of hurt. It is not
one person’s fault but
one person’s fault butJeremy Corbyn
one person’s fault butjeremy Corbyn
allowed
one person’s fault butJeremy Corbyn
allowed the space for anti—Semites
allowed the space for anti-Semites
to come
allowed the space for anti—Semites
to come into the party and the
leadership did absolutely nothing
about it. Let’s hear
about it. Let’s hearfrom our
about it. Let’s hear from our
audience.
about it. Let’s hearfrom our
audience. Jane. Hello, like
audience. jane. Hello, like
everybody I
audience. Jane. Hello, like
everybody I have been horrified by
this story. We had today that the
labour Party
Labour Party are accountable, but
labour Party are accountabla, but
really they are
Labour Party are accountable, but
really they are an entity and surely
there must be some individuals to be
held accountable. Are there any
legal redress is that will ensure
that the people behind this are
that the peopla behind this are
found
that the people behind this are
found accountable? It is one thing
being expelled from your political
Party.
party, but to me that is not enough
for the situation that has happened.
To drag hate crime into politics is
To drag hate crime into politic is
a pretty
To drag hate crime into politics is
a pretty serious thing and so
against the British way of life.
Paula? I want to come back on Nick’s
point when he said don’t
point when he said don’tjudge my
point when he said don’t judge my
words, judged
point when he said don’tjudge my
words, judged by actions. Prejudice
words, judged byactions. Prejudice
is displayed
words, judged by actions. Prejudice
is displayed through words and words
do matter. I want to come back to
Chris because he has very quickly
gone in and criticised Keir Starmer,
but I would remind him that the
Conservative Party has also been
accused of racism against people of
accused of racism against peopla of
Islamic
accused of racism against people of
Islamic faith, so when people look
Islamic faith, so when peopla look
forward
Islamic faith, so when people look
forward to an investigation into
their practices and see some
apologies from them. We are still
waiting for a report from the
Conservative Party into prejudice,
it was announced last year. When
it was announced last year. when
will we
it was announced last year. When
will we see it? That report is under
way, it is independent and has been
conducted by a former commissioner.
when will
When will we see it? I can’t give
when will we see it? I can’t give
you a day, the
When will we see it? I can’t give
you a day, the work is under way.
But there is only one political
party in history that has been
investigated by the Equality and
Human Rights Commission and that is
the Labour Party on the anti—Semite
the labour Party on the anti-Semite
issue. The
the Labour Party on the anti—Semite
issue. The Conservatives have
appointed the most diverse
government in British history and we
are the first party to have
appointed an ethnic minority
Chancellor of the Exchequer. We were
the first party to appoint an ethnic
minority Home Secretary and we have
appointed the most diverse cabinet
as a symbol of our commitment to
this important issue.
Bowler—mac gravy—mac that is what
Bowlar-mac gravy-mac that is what
they used to
Bowler—mac gravy—mac that is what
they used to say to folk when they
were de—segregating their
neighbourhoods. "We have a black
person in our neighbourhood, so we
are cool. We are all white. —— you
are cool. We are all white. -- you
know, that is
are cool. We are all white. —— you
know, that is what they used to say
to folk. Baroness pharmacy has been
on you, not you, personally, but in
her party, the Conservative Party
for years --
for years —— Baroness Farsi. There
for years -- Baroness Farsi. There
is
for years —— Baroness Farsi. There
is housework
for years -- Baroness Farsi. There
is housework you
for years —— Baroness Farsi. There
is housework you need to be doing
too, and putting people of colour in
too, and putting peopla of colour in
the
too, and putting people of colour in
the cabinet does not erase that
fact. (“an
fact. Can I
the cabinet does not erase that
fact. Can Ijust... Go ahead, but I
fact. (“an Ijust... Go ahead, butl
need to bring in
fact. Can Ijust... Go ahead, but I
need to bring in Anthony. I was
going to say the Tories do need to
acknowledge there is a problem with
Islamophobia in the Tory Party, and
they do acknowledge the need to do
something about it. The Board of
deputies did input into the report,
but we need to look at scale. The
BNP have also been investigated by
the EHRC, but so many people in the
the EHRC, but so many peopla in the
labour Party
the EHRC, but so many people in the
Labour Party have been investigated.
labour Party have been investigated.
You are
Labour Party have been investigated.
You are not seeing from the
Conservative Party MPs fleeing from
Conservative Party MPs ﬂeeing from
the party,
Conservative Party MPs fleeing from
the party, Leica pregnant women and
the party, Leira pregnant women and
the labour
the party, Leica pregnant women and
the Labour Party conference, and she
the labour Party conference, and she
even had
the Labour Party conference, and she
even had to have security. Louise
Ullman, who had to flee the party
Ullman, who had to ﬂee the party
after 55 years,
Ullman, who had to flee the party
after 55 years, so you are not
seeing the same level of scale even
though issues to be addressed in the
Conservative Party. How is this
looking to you on the other side of
the Atlantic, to bring you an here?
I’m going to say thank God —— not
I’m going to say thank God -- not
going to say
I’m going to say thank God —— not
going to say thank God I’m not
involved in British politics, I have
involved in British politic, I have
my own
involved in British politics, I have
my own problems on the side of the
pond. And I mean this very
respectfully to Chris, but this is
what I would say. I am relating what
Bonnie is saying about tokenism, and
I think what we find in our society,
we have to break down the systemic
and institutional racism. If the
racists think you are a racist,
guess what, you are a racist. If
anti—Semites think you are an
anti—Semite, you likely are an
anti—Semite, and even if you are not
anti-Semite, and even if you are not
doing it
anti—Semite, and even if you are not
doing it intentionally there are
systemic and institutional biases
and I think Bonnie’s point, which I
would like to hammer, you can’t say,
"Oneof my best
"OneOf my best friends is black and
therefore I am not a racist"
therefore I am not a racist", you
just can’t do that, it is tokenism.
We have to do what Doctor Martin
Luther King Junior said a
Luther King Junior said along
We have to do what Doctor Martin
Luther King Junior said a long time
Luther King junior said a long time
ago, judge
Luther King Junior said a long time
ago, judge each other by the content
of our character and not the colour
of her skin. Either way,
of herskin. Eitherway, I
of our character and not the colour
of her skin. Either way, I grew up
in a very patriarchal Italian
American immigrant family, so you
are also biased by the way you grew
up. It is important for you to seek
that enlightenment and make that
transformation, and we need to do it
as a culture and civilisation. It
has to be at the institutional
lavel. It
level. It has to be at the Labour
lavel. It has to be at the labour
and
level. It has to be at the Labour
and Conservative level, frankly.
These appointments I mentioned
eartier
earlier are not tokenistic. Chris...
eartier are not tokenistic. Chris...
Chris, Chris, it’s
earlier are not tokenistic. Chris...
Chris, Chris, it’s important, Chris,
because it’s important for you,
berause it’s important for you,
berause
because it’s important for you,
because you’re a good guy. What we
because you’re a good guy. what we
are saying to
because you’re a good guy. What we
are saying to you, it doesn’t
matter, 0K? What matters is what you
matter, 0K? what matters is what you
do. That’s
matter, 0K? What matters is what you
do. That’s what we are saying. It
doesn’t matter you have a black and
brown cabinet. It doesn’t matter.
That’s what people in the streets
are about now. It doesn’t matter.
It’s what you do, and if you pursue
policies and stay the same way, you
could have whatever. It don’t
matter. That is what I am trying to
say, and it’s important for you to
get it inside. She means it
respectfully, too, and I want to get
that in. I don’t know if I do... She
is giving you the benefit of the
doubt. You’re not racist. She is
trying to tell you you’re in a web,
and you need to see things the way
minority see them. My point was my
colleagues in Government are not
there for reasons of tokenism but
they are there because they are
incredibly talented, hard—working,
incredibly talented, hard-working,
energetic and
incredibly talented, hard—working,
energetic and dynamic people and of
course I understand we have to
dismantle any barriers to anyone
achieving their potential because,
in the words of Martin Luther King
junior, who
Junior, who Anthony quoted a go,
junior, who Anthony quoted a go,
what
Junior, who Anthony quoted a go,
what matters is the content of
someone’s
someone’s character, their ability
and talent. I never used the word
token. You did. You used it twice.
Someone did. He did. It wasn’t me. I
think we need to concentrate a bit
more on the Labour Party
anti—Semitism because when you look
anti-Semitism because when you look
at what jeremy
anti—Semitism because when you look
at whatJeremy Corbyn did this
at whatjeremy Corbyn did this
morning in
at whatJeremy Corbyn did this
morning in his speech he totally
tried to say it wasn’t so important.
We even tried to suggest he had made
improvements, and he is someone who
has to accept responsibility, and I
think the lessons from the Labour
think the lassons from the labour
Party are what
think the lessons from the Labour
Party are what we should be really
focusing on today. Let’s hear more
from our audience. Lots of hands up.
Going back to the culture of the
labour Party,
Labour Party, I think since the
labour Party, I think since the
appointment
Labour Party, I think since the
appointment of Keir Starmer I think
he really has stamped a clear
message regarding it. OK, yes, we
can’t turn back what has happened,
but hopefully... With the message he
but hopefully... with the message he
has sent out,
but hopefully... With the message he
has sent out, and we just saw some
of Rebeca
of Rebecca Long—Bailey, early doors,
of Rebeca Long-Bailay, earty doors,
I think
of Rebecca Long—Bailey, early doors,
I think that hopefully sends a clear
message going forward. Alex? Is a
young person brought up and talked
about the horrors of the Holocaust
-- as a young
—— as a young person. I feel it is
-- as a young person. I feel it is
absolutely
—— as a young person. I feel it is
absolutely ludicrous things like
this are still happening in today’s
this are still happening in todars
politic and
this are still happening in today’s
politics and people need to be held
accountable. I agree. Absolutely.
accountabla. Iagree. Absolutely.
You
accountable. I agree. Absolutely.
You don’t expect anti—Semitism in
You don’t expect anti-Semitism in
the opposition
You don’t expect anti—Semitism in
the opposition party. It is
unimaginable, let alone being found
guilty of victimisation and
harassment. Miles? Good evening. I
think it’s a terrible shame to see
what the Labour Party did, but as
what the labour Party did, but as
MP5 how
what the Labour Party did, but as
MP5 how are we going to change that
MPs how are we going to change that
in future so there is no hate crime
in any political party anywhere, and
for anybody who does work for the
Government, who wants to become a
Member of Parliament, they know they
Member of Partiament, they know they
are safe
Member of Parliament, they know they
are safe where they are working?
Let’s have a final word from you.
One question was about, is any legal
action going to be taken against
anyone in the Labour Party? How are
anyone in the labour Party? How are
you going to
anyone in the Labour Party? How are
you going to change the culture
within the party from here on in?
Firstly, since Keir Starmer became
the leader I think it is nearly up
the leader I think it is nearty up
to about
the leader I think it is nearly up
to about 300 cases dealt with in our
complaints system. That, just to
give a sense, it is more than in the
whole of 2019. Clearly Keir has been
whole of 2019. Cleariy Keir has been
trying to make
whole of 2019. Clearly Keir has been
trying to make progress on
individuals held to account since he
became leader. But asking very
specifically, any prospect of legal
action being taken against anyone in
the party, given the report out
today? Well, look, I can’t comment
on whether individuals want to take
legal action on particular bits of
the report, but obviously, number
one, I
one, Isay
the report, but obviously, number
one, I say we will of course be
holding people to account. That’s
holding peopla to account. That’s
why we are
holding people to account. That’s
why we are going to improve our
complaints system, and Marie asked
me very fairty
me very fairly about how we will do
me very fairty about how we will do
that going
me very fairly about how we will do
that going forward. We have to put
an action plan together now by the
10th of December. We will be
reaching out, and Marie knows this,
to the board of deputies, the
to the board of deputies, theJewish
to the board of deputies, the jewish
labour
to the board of deputies, theJewish
labour movement and the wider
labour movement and the widerJewish
labour movement and the widerjewish
community as
labour movement and the widerJewish
community as we do that, to make
sure we do have a system and there
is no political interference, that
it is property
it is properly resourced and people
it is property resourced and people
are property
it is properly resourced and people
are properly trained, it is
transparent, that it has proper
mles
rules about what sanctions are
mles about what sanctions are
appropriate
rules about what sanctions are
appropriate so everyone can have
confidence in it, but as I say there
is a wider question here. That
process is vitally important and we
will put it in place but there is a
fair challenge, too, about changing
fair challange, too, about changing
the culture,
fair challenge, too, about changing
the culture, and we change the
culture through leadership. We
change it through leadership by what
Keir Starmer has been staying and
doing over the past six months. One
of the reasons I backed Keir
of the reasons I backed Keirfour
of the reasons I backed Keir four
leader
of the reasons I backed Keirfour
leader while those conversations I
had with him about his determination
to tackla
to tackle this issue —— for leader.
to tackle this issue -- for leader.
He set that
to tackle this issue —— for leader.
He set that out and made it a policy
in his acceptance speech back in
April and
in his acceptance speech hack in
April and he
in his acceptance speech back in
April and he has been putting that
into action since and it is that
leadership that will be vital to
bring about that cultural change we
need. Maria is absolutely right to
55V
say it won’t happen overnight but we
are determined to make it happen and
work at it. I will take another
question in a moment, but before we
do that I want to say we are looking
for peopla to
for people tojoin
do that I want to say we are looking
for people to join our virtual
audience in the programme is coming
up. Next week we are in Lewisham in
south-east
south—east London, virtually of
south-east London, virtually of
course.
south—east London, virtually of
course. The week after we are in
Dover. If you live in either of
those two places or they’re about to
those two places or therre about to
get in touch on
those two places or they’re about to
get in touch on the Question Time
website. You can fill in the form
website. You ran fill in the form
and be part of
website. You can fill in the form
and be part of the audience. We
would love to see you. Do come and
be part of it. Right, let’s take our
second question now, from Helen.
Given the global importance
of the USA, should people in the UK
be concerned that the real choice
Americans appear to have is to vote
for who they consider
is the least worst candidate
for the role of President?
, white and I will
,white and I will come to
, white and I will come to you
first. --
first. —— Anthony, country first.
first. -- Anthony, country first.
What
what is your
first. —— Anthony, country first.
What is your view? We get two
what is your view? We get two
choices --
What is your view? We get two
choices —— I will come to you first.
choices -- I will come to you first.
To my choices,
choices —— I will come to you first.
To my choices, some of it a
calibration exactly of what she is
saying and I agree it is the least
of the two evils, if you will. But
it is totally different this time.
We have one person threatening the
system, 24A—year—old system known as
system, 2M-year-old system known as
the
system, 24A—year—old system known as
the American experiment. We have one
person who wants to take away
polling stations, remove mail
sorting machines, remove post office
boxes, and the rhetoric coming from
that person is a disaster for the
United States. The president of the
United States is suggesting he may
or may not accept a peaceful
transfer of power, and so I call on
transfer of power, and so I all on
all patriots in
transfer of power, and so I call on
all patriots in the United States to
put aside their partisan ship and
seek a higher order which is
patriotism and look at that. When
patriotism and look at that. when
you compare
patriotism and look at that. When
you compare that person to the Vice
President, he has his shortcomings,
for sure, but I’m
forsure, but I’m reminded
President, he has his shortcomings,
for sure, but I’m reminded of what
mayor Ed Koch once said on politics,
mayor Ed Koch once said on politic,
campaigning in
mayor Ed Koch once said on politics,
campaigning in 1978, he said if you
like nine out of the 12 things I am
saying you should vote for me but if
you like 12 of them you need a
psychiatrist. The point being there
is no politician that is perfect in
terms of the fingerprint of the
voter and the politician. For me, I
want that return to normalcy for the
United States and for the world. So
I have been a big supporter as a
Republican alongside the Lincoln
Project and others in the United
States Vice President
States Vice PresidentJoe Biden.
States Vice President joe Biden.
Also, you
States Vice PresidentJoe Biden.
Also, you were a big supporter of
Tmmp and his
Trump and his cheerleader and public
Tmmp and his cheerleader and public
voice, for the
Trump and his cheerleader and public
voice, for the first ten days I
think, Anthony. It was 11!
LAUGHTER
11, so sorry! You have
MUGHTER
11, so sorry! You have been very
critical of Donald Trump since then,
critical of Donald Tmmp since then,
but would
critical of Donald Trump since then,
but would it be fair to say if he
hadn’t sacked you you would still be
working for him now? I
working for him now? Ijust want to
give everybody the timeline so they
know. I started working for him in
July
july 2017, was
know. I started working for him in
July 2017, was fired abruptly 11
july 2017, was fired abruptly 11
days later
July 2017, was fired abruptly 11
days later and I accept
responsibility for that. I did
something that deserve to be fired
and I never blamed anybody. For two
years I tried to stay loyal to the
President and his agenda. You can
President and his agenda. You ran
see me on
President and his agenda. You can
see me on countless shows trying to
advocate on behalf of Republican
policies and what the president was
doing, but he made it impossible.
doing, but he made it impossibla.
Separating
doing, but he made it impossible.
Separating women and children at the
border, denouncing American
intelligence agencies, calling the
intelligence agencies, railing the
press the
intelligence agencies, calling the
press the enemy of the people, if
you are using racist, nativist drops
against American congresswomen, it
against American congressmmen, it
just became
against American congresswomen, it
just became impossible. So he was
just became impossibla. So he was
moving the
just became impossible. So he was
moving the goalposts and I said, OK,
I ran no longer
I can no longer accept this sort of
behaviour. That’s what happened.
What I would say to you, the facts
what I would say to you, the facts
are changing,
What I would say to you, the facts
are changing, then you change your
opinion. My liberal
opinion. My liberalfriends
are changing, then you change your
opinion. My liberal friends would
say, you know, he is the same guy he
was in 2015, so he is doing the
exact same thing is here in 2020, so
why did you change? You must be a
better employee. Well, I wouldn’t
better employee. Well, Iwouldn’t
have
better employee. Well, I wouldn’t
have supported him for two years if
I was a bitter employee that make a
bitter employee. I say he might not
hither employee. I say he might not
have changed,
bitter employee. I say he might not
have changed, but I have changed. I
have become way more psychologically
have become my more psychologically
minded
have become way more psychologically
minded and empathetic to what is
exactly going on and what the
struggle is now for working—class
families in the US. I grew up in a
working-class
working—class family. But it was an
working-class family. But it was an
aspirational
working—class family. But it was an
aspirational working—class family
aspirational working-class family
where
aspirational working—class family
where we were in the middle class.
of
Of those families feel today
economically desperate. I thought Mr
Tmmp would
Trump would represent them in
Tmmp would represent them in
Washington
Trump would represent them in
Washington but it turns out he was
really just
reallyjust representing himself.
Bonnie? I want to go back to the
question, with respect, to the
questioner. We use a term like least
worst. What are we selecting?
worst. what are we selecting?
Pims?
worst. What are we selecting?
Pizzas? This is the problem. We
Pims? This is the problem. We
don’t
Pizzas? This is the problem. We
don’t talk about leadership. What
don’t talk about leadership. what
does
don’t talk about leadership. What
does least worst mean? What do we
does least worst mean? what do we
want in a
does least worst mean? What do we
want in a leader? We have a leader
here who we got off the television,
basically. America, he is off the
television too. Is that what we are
telavision too. Is that what we are
about?
television too. Is that what we are
about? We need to check ourselves,
and our leader is us. If we think
the leader is somewhere up in the
stratosphere, we are going to get
what we deserved. I don’t know what
least worst is. I have lived through
a lot of presidents and I know what
a leader is and we need to talk
about leadership. That is one of the
problems with the Labour Party and
problams with the labour Party and
the
problems with the Labour Party and
the Conservative Party. It is a
leadership issue. Anthony, let me
say something to you. Firstly, let
me give you your respect. The last
two years you have been incredible
in terms of coming clean on TV in
front of peopla.
front of people. You published a
front of peopla. You published a
book.
front of people. You published a
book. You’re a behind the incredible
Lincoln project of conservatives and
republicans who actually tried to
save it, conservatism, and make it
decent again. but the other thing
you did, because of your charisma
and intelligence, you normalised
Donald Trump, and that is the
Donald Tmmp, and that is the
problem. I’m
Donald Trump, and that is the
problem. I’m not saying it’s
problem. I’m not saying it’sjust
problem. I’m not saying it’s just
you. I’m talking
problem. I’m not saying it’sjust
you. I’m talking about all of you
are very intelligent people in the
beginning, who flocked around this
beginning, who ﬂocked around this
man
beginning, who flocked around this
man because of your political
beliefs. Donald Trump was out of
beliefs. Donald Tmmp was out of
order for
beliefs. Donald Trump was out of
order for 30 years.
orderfor 30 years. It
beliefs. Donald Trump was out of
orderfor 30 years. Itjust
order for 30 years. Itjust didn’t
order for 30 years. It just didn’t
happen. We
order for 30 years. Itjust didn’t
happen. We are now having to deal
with talking about least worst, as
if we were talking about choosing a
television host instead of leader of
the free world. This is horrible,
the free world. This is horribla,
horrible
the free world. This is horrible,
horrible political position for us
to be in. I
to be in. Ijust wanted to say that
to you. And, again, thank you guys
for what you’re doing on the right
for helping to get
for helping to getjo elected, but
for helping to get jo elected, but
it is a
for helping to getjo elected, but
it is a terrible, horrible mess. The
it is a terribla, horrible mess. The
norms of
it is a terrible, horrible mess. The
norms of the United States are in
trouble -- trying
trouble —— trying to get
norms of the United States are in
trouble —— trying to getJoe
elected. The norms of this country
are in trouble, and norms are what
make civilisation. That is what we
have to go back to at the
inauguration.
Anthony? Can I respond? Just
Anthony? (“an I respond? just
quickly. I
Anthony? Can I respond? Just
quickly. I respect what you are
saying, but
saying, butl
quickly. I respect what you are
saying, but I would also say to you
that as a lesson I have tried to own
that as a lasson I have tried to own
that in the
that as a lesson I have tried to own
that in the public domain. I know
you have. Many of my Republican
friends, who I would say our
mainstream Republicans were doing
the same thing. It does not take
away from me at all, if anything it
makes me accountable for my decision
makes me accountabla for my decision
making, I have to
makes me accountable for my decision
making, I have to live with it for
the rest of my life. Having said
that, being willing to admit it and
trying to break away and trying to
do something for other people is
do something for other peopla is
what I
do something for other people is
what I have been trying to do. That
is why I gave you my respect at the
beginning. I
beginning. Iwant
is why I gave you my respect at the
beginning. I want everybody to know
who is watching the show you have to
be very careful about your decision
making because you can get your
making because you ran get your
pride and ego
making because you can get your
pride and ego involved in your
decision—making and then your
emotions
decision-making and then your
emotions go
decision—making and then your
emotions go up and your intelligence
goes down. For me I had a self
narrative that was ego —based, I had
narrative that was ego -based, I had
some
narrative that was ego —based, I had
some measure of financial success in
some measure offinancial success in
the
some measure of financial success in
the United States and I wanted to
work in the White House. I was
work in the white House. I was
normalising
work in the White House. I was
normalising the president because of
the success story of Eisenhower and
Abraham Lincoln, I
Abraham Lincoln, Ithought
the success story of Eisenhower and
Abraham Lincoln, I thought he could
not be this crazy. , where he was. I
am telling that as a cautionary tale
am telling that as a cautionary talc
for
am telling that as a cautionary tale
for others.
am telling that as a cautionary talc
for others. Try
am telling that as a cautionary tale
for others. Try to put your pride
and ego aside when you are making
decisions that are political or
relationship based on in your
business. Paula? I hear
business. Paula? I hearwhat
relationship based on in your
business. Paula? I hear what Anthony
is saying and it seems that some
Republicans are getting by’s remorse
and
and regretting that Donald Trump is
and regretting that Donald Tmmp is
their
and regretting that Donald Trump is
their representative in the
presidential race. But they have had
opportunities through impeachment
and others to remove him, why didn’t
they take them? Did they put wanting
to hold onto power ahead of what was
good for the country? Yes. David?
(“an I ask
Can I ask all the panel if what they
(“an I ask all the panel if what they
think will
Can I ask all the panel if what they
think will happen in the United
States if Donald Trump is
re—elected, will they remain united?
re-elected, will they remain united?
We will
re—elected, will they remain united?
We will come to that in a minute.
Looking after number one, but
unfortunately it might be closer
than you think next week. Marie, the
question from Helen what should
question from Helan what should
peopla in
question from Helen what should
people in the UK be concerned? And
yet Donald Trump is steadily behind
yet Donald Tmmp is steadily behind
in the polls,
yet Donald Trump is steadily behind
in the polls, but who knows what
could happen? Are you concerned? I
definitely think I am concerned
because whatever happens in the US
is going to impact right around the
world. In terms of the
world. In terms of theJewish
world. In terms of the jewish
community a
world. In terms of theJewish
community a recent poll from the
American
Americanjewish
community a recent poll from the
AmericanJewish Committee said that
American jewish Committee said that
75% of
7596 of jewish
Americanjewish Committee said that
75% ofJewish people would vote
Democrat. Certainly Donald Trump has
Democrat. Certainly Donald Tmmp has
been a very
Democrat. Certainly Donald Trump has
been a very divisive figure and
personally for me he has not
disavowed himself of his
associations with the right wing or
white supremacists. But in terms of
foreign policy he has done some good
things. In the Middle East, for
example, he has helped normalise
relations with Israel and Dubai and
other countries. With the UAE and
other countries. with the UAE and
Bahrain.
other countries. With the UAE and
Bahrain. And of course we have got
Brexit which has not yet been
mentioned on this programme. That is
unusual. Absolutely, and the UK has
a strong relationship with the US, a
special relationship, and I will be
very concerned if
very concerned ifJoe Biden was the
very concerned if joe Biden was the
president and
very concerned ifJoe Biden was the
president and will that relationship
tarry on.
carry on. Would you rather it was
Donald Trump? I want somebody with
the right values, values are what
matter to me and I want to see the
person who has got those values and
is going to be a leader. We have
seen what happened with the Labour
seen what happened with the labour
Party in this
seen what happened with the Labour
Party in this country. Of the two
which one? It is very difficult. I
am not a US citizen, but I am
am nota US citizen, but I am
looking for
am not a US citizen, but I am
looking for values and historically
the jewish
theJewish community, 75% of them,
the jewish community, 7596 of them,
would usually
theJewish community, 75% of them,
would usually be voting Democrats.
But I am very worried at the outcome
whatever happens. How can you make
whatever happens. How ran you make
peace with two
whatever happens. How can you make
peace with two countries that Israel
is not even at war with? Two,
leaving the Palestinians out of
anything, anything, they were not
even at the table. You are talking
about the deal that Donald Trump has
about the deal that Donald Tmmp has
proposed?
about the deal that Donald Trump has
proposed? That was a peace deal and
that is the corn that Donald Trump
that is the corn that Donald Tmmp
lays down. The
that is the corn that Donald Trump
lays down. The first racist
demonstration after Donald Trump
demonstration after Donald Tmmp
became
demonstration after Donald Trump
became president was in
Charlottesville. A Jewish
Charlottesville. AJewish girl was
Charlothesvilla. A jewish girt was
killed.
Charlottesville. AJewish girl was
killed. This was guys walking down
the street looking like something
out of the Nuremberg rallies saying
jews will not
Jews will not replace us. I do not
jews will not replace us. I do not
get it. I really do
Jews will not replace us. I do not
get it. I really do not get it how
anybody ran
anybody can talk about backing this
anybody ran talk about backing this
man
anybody can talk about backing this
man with that kind of thing. It is a
total con. To leave the Palestinians
out of this is another part of the
problem. While I have said in
problem. whila I have said in
fairness
problem. While I have said in
fairness to him in terms of foreign
policy, the normalisation of
relationships is important. That is
what I was talking about when I was
talking about trauma. I am talking
about the 360 degrees of this. How
ran you look at
can you look at that? Joe Biden came
ran you look at that? joe Biden came
into the
can you look at that? Joe Biden came
into the presidency because of
Charlottesville. That literally was
Charlothesvilla. That literally was
all
Charlottesville. That literally was
all white guys walking down... You
saw it. Explain it to me. I agree
saw it. Explain itto me. Iagree
that
saw it. Explain it to me. I agree
that Donald Trump is very divisive.
that Donald Tmmp is very divisive.
Explain that to
that Donald Trump is very divisive.
Explain that to me, please. I am
asking you because I do not
understand how a Jewish person can
understand how a jewish person ran
say, OK he
understand how a Jewish person can
say, OK he made peace over there,
but yet the anti—Semitism tropes are
but yet the anti-Semitism tropes are
gaining a hold
but yet the anti—Semitism tropes are
gaining a hold in this country. I
don’t get it. Explain to me. I
don’t get it. Explain to me. Ijust
want to confirm to you that where
there have been policies like the
travel ban to Muslim countries, the
Board of Deputies has criticised
Donald Trump, we do not hesitate to
Donald Tmmp, we do not hesitate to
criticise
Donald Trump, we do not hesitate to
criticise his policies. How do you
feel? Let me bring neck in. Riveting
though that is. I must bring the
rest of the panel in. Nick. I
presume you are supporting Joe
presume you are supporting joe
Biden,
presume you are supporting Joe
Biden, obviously. Should we be
concerned here that we are looking
at the two least worst candidate, as
Helan says? It
Helen says? It is a decision for the
Helan says? It is a decision for the
American
Helen says? It is a decision for the
American people between the two
candidates. It would not come as a
surprise to see if I was in America
I would be supporting the Democrats.
Obviously I share the concerns about
divisive language. Of course I
absolutely do and I have spoken out
in the past around things like the
travel ban. But at the same time we
have to recognise this election will
have to recognise this elaction will
take
have to recognise this election will
take place next week, it is a
decision for the American people,
decision for the American peopla,
and our
decision for the American people,
and our relationship with America is
not related to one president or one
era, it goes back over generations.
There are cultural, political,
economic ties and there are huge
challenges around the world, the
coronavirus crisis, and climate
change to name two of them. We have
to work with the winner of this
presidential election and at the
same time be a critical friend to
America and told the president to
account and be critical where
necessary. That is the approach a
labour
Labour government would take to the
labour government would take to the
winner of
Labour government would take to the
winner of this presidential
election. It will be tricky for the
government if
government ifJoe Biden gets in. He
government if joe Biden gets in. He
has had
government ifJoe Biden gets in. He
has had some strong things to say
about the internal market will, as
has Nancy Pelosi in Congress. Joe
has Nancy Pelosi in Congress. joe
Biden says
has Nancy Pelosi in Congress. Joe
Biden says he respects the result of
the referendum on Brexit. That is
not what I am referring to. You know
what he said. I am on broadly the
same page as Nick. I will respect
and trust the
and trust thejudgment
same page as Nick. I will respect
and trust the judgment of the
American people. Any trade deal
between the US and the UK must be
contingent on the respect of the
Good Friday Agreement. We plan to
respect the Good Friday Agreement.
He is concerned you will not. My
point is are you concerned that if
joe Biden wins
Joe Biden wins the relationship
between the British Government and
America might be less warm? No I am
America might be lass warm? No I am
not for two
America might be less warm? No I am
not for two reasons. We have been
bending over backwards to respect
the Good Friday Agreement for the
last few years since the Brexit vote
happen. To make a general point, the
Conservatives in government have
worked closely with Republican
presidents like Dwight Eisenhower
and Ronald Reagan and Democrat
presidents like reasonable, Clinton
presidents like reasonabla, (linton
and
presidents like reasonable, Clinton
and Barack Obama and Labour in
and Barack Obama and labour in
office
and Barack Obama and Labour in
office have done the same. Whoever
office have done the same. whoever
occupies the
office have done the same. Whoever
occupies the White House, as our
occupies the white House, as our
closest
occupies the White House, as our
closest and long—standing ally, we
closest and long-standing ally, we
will always
closest and long—standing ally, we
will always work closely and
cooperatively with America whoever
occupies that office. I trust the
American people to make their own
decision. Did you ever vote, Bonnie,
in the American election? Of course
in the American elaction? Of course
I did. And
in the American election? Of course
I did. And here as well. Briefly.
I did. And here as well. Brieﬂy.
Nancy Pelosi,
I did. And here as well. Briefly.
Nancy Pelosi, leader of the house,
and she will be on Tuesday, she
ratifies the deal. I hope you guys
are right that you are not
disturbing the Good Friday
Agreement. Joe Biden is Irish. He
Agreement. joe Biden is Irish. He
will not
Agreement. Joe Biden is Irish. He
will not let
Agreement. joe Biden is Irish. He
will not let you
Agreement. Joe Biden is Irish. He
will not let you get away with that.
Let’s take another question, I
rannot
cannot believe we have come so late
in the programme to this because it
has been first in the programme for
months.
Yes, good evening, Fiona.
Good evening, panel.
A recent study from Imperial
Forecasting suggests that Covid—19
deaths in wave 2 could far exceed
those in wave 1.
Given that France, Germany and UK
devolved administrations are either
in or have announced a total
lockdown, why is the UK government
so reluctant to follow suit?
Nick. I
Nick. lam
Nick. I am speaking to you from
Walas
Wales this evening and I am not in
the studio because we are in day six
of our
of ourfirebreak, our 17
the studio because we are in day six
of our firebreak, our 17 day
firebreak here in Wales. That action
firebreak here in Walas. That action
is
firebreak here in Wales. That action
is being taken here in Wales to try
to get on top of the virus. I think
to get on top of the vims. I think
that is the
to get on top of the virus. I think
that is the appropriate thing to do.
I think if we look at the situation
in England, I think we are at a
critical moment. Keir Starmer argued
for a circuit breaker of two to
three weeks. I do understand that
time is passing, of course it is,
but I think... Action is required.
It is absolutely clear that what we
have to do now is to make sure that
we not only have that circuit
breaker, but also that time is used
to get on top of test, trace and
isolate. Nick, I
isolate. Nick, lam going
to get on top of test, trace and
isolate. Nick, I am going to
isolate. Nick, I am going tojump
isolate. Nick, lam going tojump
in. Nick, I
in. Nick, lam
isolate. Nick, I am going tojump
in. Nick, I am sorry,
in. Nick, lam sorry, not
isolate. Nick, I am going tojump
in. Nick, I am sorry, not only are
you in a circuit breaker, it looks
like your computer is having a bit
of a circuit breakdown as well. We
ran hear you,
can hear you, but we cannot see you.
ran hear you, but we cannot see you.
I will come
can hear you, but we cannot see you.
I will come back to you as soon as
we get that reinstated. Chris,
coming back to the question. You
have got France and Germany and the
devolved administrations in Lough
dens. Germany is going to look down
and it has got half as many new
rases as
cases as us and a fraction of the
rases as us and a fraction of the
number of
cases as us and a fraction of the
number of deaths every day, surely
it is a matter of time? Each country
is different and we need to
carefully balance the right approach
for our country. I know you are not
going to come on and say definitely
yes there is a lockdown, but anyone
looking at the graphs must be
thinking it is
thinking it isjust
looking at the graphs must be
thinking it is just a
thinking it isjust a matter of
thinking it is just a matter of
time.
thinking it isjust a matter of
time. We have really different
circumstances in different regions
of the country. The East of England
only has one quarter of the cases
that the North West has. Cases are
rising everywhere. The World Health
Organization and the Deputy Chief
Medical Officer says regional makes
sense. We have to balance it with
children’s education, mental health,
people seeking cancer treatment,
jobs, we have to balance those
considerations against the health
consideration and get it right.
Things are working differently in
different parts of the country, that
is why this careful and well
calibrated balance and balance
approach has been taken. That will
be kept under review and if the
facts change, different decisions
might be taken in the future. I am
listening to you go through that and
I have got no crystal ball and I
have got no medical knowledge, but
have got no medical knowladge, but
watching the
have got no medical knowledge, but
watching the graphs, cases are
watching the graphs, rases are
increasing
watching the graphs, cases are
increasing everywhere, are you going
to end up coming back here in two or
three weeks and saying, we have seen
the facts and we are going into a
lockdown? I do not have a crystal
ball and it would be rash to make
predictions about the future. But to
date looking at the regional
differences, looking at the costs of
a lockdown would impose on health,
mental health, children’s education,
jobs and so on, the balance being
stmck is
struck is the right one. The World
stmck is the right one. The World
Health
struck is the right one. The World
Health Organization agree with that
and it is kept under review the
whole time, which is a sensible
thing to do. Donna, you are shaking
your head and I know that you have
been shielding with your husband for
eight months now.
Eight months, yeah.
I’d just like to come back
to that point, so me
and my husband have been shielding
since the 23rd of March.
Just to give a brief idea,
my husband partway through this went
on to kidney dialysis,
so my question really is,
the shielding group,
the 2.2 million people at the end
of March that got these
letters who were petrified
to go out of their homes,
and we couldn’t even go
to our gardens, now the cases
are going absolutely
through the roof —
where is the common sense?
And I know obviously
there are treatments,
but can Ijust highlight
there are thousands of people
waiting for organ donations
across this country,
and, as I said to Fiona earlier,
the plight of my husband and many
others in the same situation
is being put on a list to be taken
off a list,
to be put back on a list?
Now, my fear is we are going to get
back to routine operations,
transplantation, getting stopped.
It’s already happening in Leeds,
in Nottingham, and you talk
about the tier system.
I live in West Lindsey,
where at the moment
it is relatively low,
in Tier 1, however literally
ii
to the two miles to the side
of me is Nottinghamshire,
who have gone into Tier 3
from Friday, and also
bordering is South Yorkshire,
and from I think Saturday we now
have North Lincolnshire
and East Hull, so with all due
respect it’s a matter
of time before...
So surely we should jump
on this bandwagon now
before it gets any worse?
Carl, you have your hand up,
and I know you’re working
as a contact tracer at the moment,
so you have a very
particular view of this.
What is your response?
Yeah, lam.
Well, I think we’ve already proved
lockdowns don’t work.
We tried it before.
All it’s doing is kicking
the can down the road.
As soon as you let people out again,
people are back to square one,
being exposed to the virus.
So what you think answer is?
Well, I think we should start
looking at different models,
like Sweden, for example.
Sweden tried a completely different
approach to anywhere else pretty
much in Europe and they have had no
massive rise in cases any different
to anywhere else in Europe.
They didn’t lockdown.
They just enforced
the social distancing.
Bars stayed open, pubs stayed open,
schools stayed open.
Sweden’s in trouble.
And people carried
on pretty much as normal.
Imean...
There were quite a few
restrictions in Sweden.
Yeah, Sweden’s in trouble.
They tried herd immunity.
That’s what you’re talking about.
And Sweden got in some
trouble with that.
I think one of the things,
and the lady who spoke,
I commiserate with her —
I’ve been separated from my
husband since February,
we can’t be together.
It...
The same thing in the United States.
We don’t have any leadership,
we don’t have a leader.
This isn’t some kind of thing
you put on a graph and stand up,
behind a podium, and talk to people
holding up graphs and charts.
The only truth here is Covid.
Covid is the truth.
And then you move from there,
and we work to unite the country.
We’re all in this together.
We’re in this together.
We’re not tiers in all of this.
We are together.
So we need a leader who can
talk to us together,
and the United States of America has
51 solutions running
around there because the leadership
refuses to take responsibility.
We need a leader here.
Anthony?
Well, I mean, I agree once again.
I think the biggest problem, again,
thinking about whatJoe Biden
was saying, he wants to shutdown
the virus and not
necessarily the economy.
If you just went through
the protocol and standards
of South Korea, who had experience
with MERS and SARS, and wejust
copy their best practices,
we would be well on our way,
whether it’s the United Kingdom
or the United States.
I willjust point out, South Korea,
20 deaths per million,
on a per capita basis.
The United States, 620
deaths per million.
And I know the United Kingdom
is suffering alongside
the United States.
Soto me it is very simple.
all
We have a tendency for myopia,
to think our Anglo—Saxon way
—— We have a tendency for myopia,
of doing things is a priori,
but I think we should be copying
the South Koreans right now,
and adopting their practices
and then you will see both
of our economies flourish.
tier
tierfrom your personal
tier from your personal knowledge of
tier from your personal knowladge of
Donald Tmmp,
tier from your personal knowledge of
Donald Trump, what is driving his
Donald Tmmp, what is driving his
reaction
Donald Trump, what is driving his
reaction to coronavirus? Is it
purely electioneering or something
purely elactioneering or something
more?
purely electioneering or something
more? Its personality. He is the
most insecure person you could ever
meet in your life, Fiona. He is
contrary... People telling him what
to do in front of him, he will do
the opposite. Anthony Gauci, he will
do the opposite. He is insecure
about having expert to make him feel
inferior and so he is classically
mishandling things. I think that is
one of the more startling things
about him, when you think about his
ascendancy to the American
presidency, but he is not somebody
who ran
who can handle conversations with
who ran handle conversations with
experts. He
who can handle conversations with
experts. He wants to run the
American presidency as a one—man
American presidency as a one-man
West End
American presidency as a one—man
West End or Broadway play. It is
nonsensical. So there is great
frustration in the US. He has
fmstration in the US. He has
politicised
frustration in the US. He has
politicised the science, lied to
people about the science, and right
now as we are speaking he is flying
now as we are speaking he is ﬂying
round
now as we are speaking he is flying
round the battle ground states
creating super spreader events. Who
creating super spreader events. who
does
creating super spreader events. Who
does this? You’re talking about
leadership. One of the things both
countries need right now is direct
point of honesty, and stop shading
things, stop spinning things, just
say "Here are the facts, this is
what we have to do is a country. We
want to make ourselves less sick. "
want to make ourselves less sick. '
the president of
want to make ourselves less sick. "
the president of the United States
has made our country sicker, weaker
and poorer, and I can’t speak
and poorer, and I can’t speakfor
and poorer, and I can’t speak for
Britain
and poorer, and I can’t speakfor
Britain because you guys know that
politics better than me, but we have
politic better than me, but we have
to cut it
politics better than me, but we have
to cut it out. That’s it. Bringing
you back to Paul’s question, Maria,
why is the UK governments are
reluctant to follow suit of places
like France and Germany going into
various permutations of the
lockdown? We have to remember some
of the countries who did really well
first time around are also taking
emergency measures now and are in
lockdown. Here in the UK the
lockdown. Here in the UK theJewish
lockdown. Here in the UK the jewish
community
lockdown. Here in the UK theJewish
community have suffered heavily with
death, as have many people from
death, as have many peopla from
ethnic
death, as have many people from
ethnic minorities. I want to commend
the report of Doreen Lawrence, and I
know there has been the Public
Health England report as well from
the Government. I think what has to
be sensible here is a pragmatic
approach, an integrated approach. We
are seeing [oral
are seeing local lockdowns. We may
are seeing [oral lockdowns. We may
have to
are seeing local lockdowns. We may
have to see national lockdowns here,
but what we need is effective quick
testing and we need the track and
trace up and working. We don’t want
it to be overwhelmed. But, yes, it
does need leadership, but I can’t
say I am in favour of the Swedish
model because... Its not working.
It’s obvious. The figures seem
really large in America but you have
to remember the population is so
much bigger. But we are of course
horrified at seeing these super
spreader events. 50 there is no easy
spreader events. So there is no easy
answer. It’s
spreader events. 50 there is no easy
answer. It’s the only time I can
answer. It’s the only time I ran
remember
answer. It’s the only time I can
remember in my lifetime, though,
where the whole world is cooperating
where the whola world is cooperating
on a
where the whole world is cooperating
on a vaccine at least, but even that
is not going to solve the problem.
But what’s the answer? I can’t give
you that. Like Mike Billy, you are a
doctor and you speak to your
colleagues on the front line. What
colleagues on the front line. what
is the
colleagues on the front line. What
is the answer? What is your view? ——
is the answer? what is your view? --
well, Billy, you’re a
is the answer? What is your view? ——
well, Billy, you’re a doctor. I’m
afraid there is not an easy solution
to the current problem, and
to the current problam, and
certainly
to the current problem, and
certainly adopting the Swedish model
would adversely affect the health
and well—being of many NHS and
and well-being of many NHS and
health
and well—being of many NHS and
health and social care staff. Also I
health and social rare staff. Also I
don’t
health and social care staff. Also I
don’t think the test and trace
system is a solution at this point
in time either. The system is most
effective in the early stages of a
effective in the earty stages of a
pandemic.
effective in the early stages of a
pandemic. As case numbers rise, we
pandemic. As rase numbers rise, we
need to
pandemic. As case numbers rise, we
need to become less reliant on the
test and trace system and more
reliant on social distancing and
impact of lockdown measures. The
problem is the rate of infection
rises beyond the capacity of the
test and trace system quite quickly.
But, Nick,
Butt, Nick, can
test and trace system quite quickly.
Butt, Nick, canl
Butt, Nick, can I let you come back
Butt, Nick, ran I let you come back
in, because we
Butt, Nick, can I let you come back
in, because we lost you for a bit
before you managed to finish your
point -- But,
point —— But, Nick. Thank you. Not
point -- But, Nick. Thank you. Not
sure what
point —— But, Nick. Thank you. Not
sure what happened there, but Chris
mentions the threat to the economy
and the biggest threat to the
economy is a virus we are not on top
of and is out of control. To
of and is out of control. To get it
under control the obviously need the
testing system but we need the
tracing system, and to have an
effective tracing system you need to
be tracing over 80% of contacts.
be tracing over 8096 of contacts.
Here in
be tracing over 80% of contacts.
Here in Wales with an 80% system we
Here in Walas with an 8096 system we
are over
Here in Wales with an 80% system we
are over that figure but
unfortunately it is not the case in
unfortunately it is not the use in
England and
unfortunately it is not the case in
England and the reason we are
arguing for that circuit breaker in
England is to give that opportunity
to get that system to work. But
also, too, to be clear, we are not
suggesting in that scenario
suggesting in that scenario schools
should close. We should all be
trying to keep schools open because
we know the damage it does to
educational attainment for children
being out of school. But the reality
is we are in the situation in
England where the Government has
lost control of the virus and time
is slipping away for them to
actually take this measure of
getting a circuit breaker in place
to try to get back in control and
back on top of testing. But
back on top of testing. Butjust
back on top of testing. But just
before you
back on top of testing. Butjust
before you we heard Billy saying
once you get to a certain level of
numbers of cases test and trace
becomes less effective and easily
becomes overwhelmed, and in Wales
where there is a greater success
with that nonetheless cases are
with that nonetheless rases are
going up?
Well, yes, cases are on
Well, yes, rases are on the rise,
and that is why
Well, yes, cases are on the rise,
and that is why we have taken the
measure we have.
That measure came into place last
Friday. It will be for 17 days and
obviously then, as we come out of
it, we will see what the impact of
that has been. But I think taking
the diligent, cautious approach that
has defined the approach to the
virus with the leadership of Mark
Drakeford here in Wales has been the
“Y
way to approach it, and the reality
is with the tiered system in England
I’m afraid it’s
I’m afraid it’sjust
is with the tiered system in England
I’m afraid it’s just not the case
I’m afraid it’s just not the rase
that
I’m afraid it’s just not the case
that areas are permanently coming
out of the restrictions or the
tiers. These figures are very sadly
going in one direction, and I want
to see the Government in England
getting on top of the virus in the
“Y
way we are attempting to do so in
Walas.
Wales. You ask the question. Do you
Walas. You ask the question. Do you
want
Wales. You ask the question. Do you
want the last word, Paul? Thank you,
yes. I
yes. Ilost
want the last word, Paul? Thank you,
yes. I lost my father and my wife
both to long—standing health issues
both to long-standing health issues
in 2019.
both to long—standing health issues
in 2019. I’m so sorry. I actually
feel fortunate that they died last
year, because we were able to give
them dignified and fitting funerals.
The families of almost 16,000
The families of almost 46,000
victims,
The families of almost 16,000
victims, and you are broadcasting
from Lincoln, that is half the
population of Lincoln. Go onto
Lincoln high Street whenever and
every other person you see, that is
the level of people who have died.
Anything, a
Anything, 3 second national
lockdown, it only risks 3 similar
lockdown, it only risks a similar
number
lockdown, it only risks 3 similar
number of families suffering this
heartache... You cannot be at your
loved one’s bedside when they have
their last breath, you can’t even
give them a fitting and dignified
sendoff. It is appalling and it
needs to happen now. Tonight, from
half past ten, half past ten. Not
three weeks in the future. It needs
to happen now. You have made your
point, Paul, and I’m so sorry for
your loss last year. Thank you very
much for that. Chris,
much forthat. Chris, I
your loss last year. Thank you very
much for that. Chris, I think you
want to come back in. I’m afraid our
hour is up. The questions came from
Lincoln. Thank you all for making
your points, and sorry we couldn’t
get you all in. Next week our
audience comes from Lewisham and on
the panel we have the Hollywood
actor Rose McGowan, the former
Brexit secretary David Davis, and
the mathematician and TV presenter
Hannah Fry, whether Mac quite a
programme. The following week our
questions come from Dover and among
others we will be joined by the
former speaker of the house, John
former speaker of the house, john
Burkle.
former speaker of the house, John
Burkle. Do
former speaker of the house, john
Burkle. Do get
former speaker of the house, John
Burkle. Do get in touch if you want
Burkla. Do get in touch if you want
to be on
Burkle. Do get in touch if you want
to be on either of those and live in
those areas. —— the former speaker
those areas. -- the former speaker
of the house, john
those areas. —— the former speaker
of the house, John Bercow. You will
of the house, john Bercow. You will
have a
of the house, John Bercow. You will
have a chance to carry on the
conversation and you can see on the
conversation and you ran see on the
screen how
conversation and you can see on the
screen how to join
screen how tojoin in. And Bonnie
says, thank you, Lincoln Project.
And the people of Lincoln! Thank you
And the peopla of Lincoln! Thank you
very much to
And the people of Lincoln! Thank you
very much to the people of Lincoln
very much to the peopla of Lincoln
for joining and
very much to the people of Lincoln
forjoining and thank you for
for joining and thank you for
joining us
forjoining and thank you for
joining us down the line. Great to
have you all on Question Time.
Goodbye.
MUSIC: Hear Say Hot Damn
by Deep East Music
Oh, it’s all coming in here!
Get the wipers on!
Don’t you worry, lads.
Mr Nippy is on the way.
Whoa—ho—ho! Can I get past him?
This is the best day out ever.
RAPID SCALES PLAYED ON PIANO
INDISTINCT CHATTER
Hello. Hope you’re all well,
and welcome to our family home
in Nottingham.
These are my brothers and sisters.
ALL: Hello!
These lockdown days have been hard
for all of us.
But imagine being stuck in a house —
seven brothers and sisters
and one of their mates —
it could be total hell.
But not for them.
This is a house like no other.